                    HSC
                Physics
                Full Marks : 40
                Time : 40 Minutes

1. What will happen of magnetic field if electric –current flows through a solenoid
made by insulated wire wound over a cylinder.
a) Will be condensed and weak b) Will be condensed and strong
c) Will be less condensed and weak d) Will be less condensed but strong
2. In which functions, electromagnetic induction is used?
A) Transistor (b) Motor
(c) Amplifier (d) Transformer
3. In which process, electromotive force is producedi)
If any magnet is kept motionless in a wire coil
ii) If any wire coil is rotated in a magnetic field
iii) If any magnet is rotated around a motionless wire coil
Which one is correct of the following?
(a) i (b) ii
(c) i and ii (d) ii and iii
5. What will happen of induced electric current if the number of turns of coil is
increased?
a) The electric current will be reduced
b) The electric current will be increased
c) The magnitude of electric current will be zero
d) The magnitude of electric current will be negative
6. What are the materials through which electric current can flow very easily?
a. insulator b. bad conductor
c. semiconductor d. conductor
7. If three resistances of values 2 ?, 3 ? and 4 ? are connected in series, then what
will be the equivalent resistance?
a. 8 ? (b) 7 ?
c. 9 ? (d) 20 ?
8. The potential difference between the two terminals of a conductor is 100 V. If the
amount of current flowing through it is 10 A, what will be its resistance?
a. 1000 ? b. 0.1 ?
c. 10 ? d. none of them
9. The electrical condition of a circuit is measure byi.
Voltmeter
ii. Ammeter
iii. Generator
Which one is correct?
a. i and ii (b) i and iii
c. ii and iii (d) i, ii and iii
10. The name of the apparatus used to determine the presence of charge is –
a) Ammeter b) Voltmeter
c) Microscope d) Electroscope
11. On which factor below the electrostatic force between two charges does not depend
on?
i) the distance between the charges
ii) the nature of the medium in which the charges are placed
iii) the masses of the charges
12.Which one of the following is correct?
a) i & ii b) i & iii
c) ii & iii d) i, ii, & iii
3. The unit of electric field intensity isa)
N b) Nm
c) Nm-1 d) NC-1
13. Volt is the unit of what?
a) electric field b) electric potential
c) electric charge d) electric current
14. Where will be the image of an object when it is placed in a denser medium and
looked from rarer medium?
a) raised upward b) gone downward
c) remained at the same place d) moved aside
Answer the questions 2 & 3 from the figure
15. What is the angle of refraction here?
a) 0° b) 90°
c) 180° d) 45°
3. What will happen if the angle of incidence is greater than the critical angle?
a) Total internal refraction b) Total internal reflection
c) Refraction d) Reflection
16. The ray diagram usually used to draw the image for a convex lens is –
(a) i (b)ii (c) I & ii (d)i, ii & iii
17. Which is the unit of power of lens?
a) Dioptre b) Watt
c) Horsepower d) Kilo-Watt Hour
18. Where convex mirrors are used?
a. cars b. torch light
c. solar oven d. Radar
2. How many types of reflection are there?
a. 4 b. 3
c. 2 d. 1
19. Image produced in a plane mirror -
i. equal to object in size
ii. can be formed in a screen
iii. formed at a distance equal to the distance of the object from the mirror.
Which one of the following is correct?
a. i and ii b. ii and iii
c. i and ii d. i, ii and iii
Answer question number 4 and 5 in the light of the above figure.
20. What will be the size of object BO?
a. magnified b. diminished
c. extremely magnified d. extremely diminished
3. Where will be the position of the object BO?
a. between the focus and the pole b. at the principal focus
c. At the centre of curvature d. between the centre of curvature and infinity
21. What type of wave sound is?
a) Transverse wave b) Electromagnetic wave
c) Longitudinal wave d) Radio wave
22. In which medium the velocity of sound is maximum?
a) Solid b) Light
c) Gaseous d) Plasma
23. Why is a dead bat seen hanging from the electric line?
i) This is because the bat lacks instant clear idea about the position and distance
between the two electric lines.
ii) It did not hear the echo of ultrasonic sound ahead.
iii) It is hanging with one wire and touching the other.
Which one of the following is correct?
a) i and ii b) i and iii
c) ii and iii d) i, ii and iii
24. Which one is the unit of momentum?
(a) kg m (b) kg ms -1 (c) kg m 2s-1 (d) kg ms -2
25. The tendency or property of a body to maintain its present state for ever is called
what?
(a) force (b) acceleration
(c) inertia (d)velocity
26. Which one is the dimension of force?
(a) MLT-2 (b) MLT-1 (c) ML-2T-2 (d) M-1LT-2
27. Which one of the following forces is stronger?
(a) gravitational force (b) weak nuclear force
(c) electromagnetic force (d) strong nuclear force
28. Which one is the unit of momentum?
(a) kg m (b) kg ms -1 (c) kg m 2s-1 (d) kg ms -2
29. A force of 50 N is applied on a body of mass 5 kg, its acceleration will be-
(a) 12 ms-2 (b) 8 ms-2 (c) 13 ms-2 (d) 10 ms-2
30. If a mass of 10 kg moves with a velocity of 10 ms-1, its momentum will be-
(a) 10 kg ms-1 (b) 120 kg ms-1 (c) 100 kg ms-1 (d) 1 kg ms-1
31. Which is the unit of work?
a) Joule b) Newton
c) Kelvin d) Watt
32. What type of energy is stored when a body is stretched?
a) Kinetic energy b) Potential Energy
c) Heat Energy d) Chemical Energy
33. A body of mass m is kept at 20 m, 30 m, 40 m and 50 m height respectively. At
which position its potential energy is maximum?
a) 20 m b) 30 m
c) 40 m d) 50 m
34. From the law of conservation of energy it is foundi)
Energy cannot be created or destroyed. The total energy of the universe is constant
and unchangeable.
ii) Non renewable energy will be finished quickly, so renewable energy has to be
used
iii) We have to use energy effectively and reduce system loss in order to save
energy.
Which one is correct?
a) i b) ii c) iii d) i. ii and iii
35. What is the name of the apparatus used to measure the atmospheric pressure?
(a) Thermometer (b) Barometer (c) Manometer (d) Seismometer.
36. The amount of liquid pressure is –
(a) proportional to its depth (b) proportional to area. (c) inversely proportional to
density (d) equal to acceleration due to gravity.
13. What is the name of the forth state of matter?
(a) Gas (b) Plasma (C) Solid (d) Liquid.
37. At the time of construction of a rail line why a small gap is kept in between two
rails?
a) To save iron.
b) In summer to increase or to decrease the temperature of the rail line.
c) To produce knocking sound when the trains run.
d) To avoid bending of the rails for its thermal expansion.
38. Why do we feel comfort when wind is blown by fans over our sweating body?
a) The wind blown by the fan prevents sweat to go out of the body.
b) Evaporation produces cooling.
c) The air blown by the fan bears cold water vapor.
d) The air blown by the fan enters into our body through hair follicles.
39. With the help of latent heat ---
i. The temperature of a body increases.
ii. The state of a substance changes.
iii. The internal energy of a body increases.
Which one is correct?
(a) i (b) ii (c) ii & iii (d) i, ii & iii
40. What type of wave sound is?
a) Transverse wave b) Electromagnetic wave
c) Longitudinal wave d) Radio wave